Added intro to linked list tutorial (#68)
Wiki-Knights/CS-Materials: src/cs1/linked-lists/linked-list-basics.md

---
title: Linked List Basics
author:
  - Jacob Gadberry 
---

# Introduction

One of the first, and most basic, data structures that we will learn about in COP 3502 is Linked Lists. This data structure is really useful for a whole host of different problems. Here we will learn about the basics.

# What is a Linked List

A Linked List is exactly what it sounds like, a list where all of the elements are linked together like a chain.

> Here is an example of a Linked List

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here is an example of a Linked List:
```

```
+------+
| head |
+------+
+------+    +------+    +-----+    +-----+    +------+
|  10  | -> |  15  | -> |  3  | -> |  1  | -> | NULL |
+------+    +------+    +-----+    +-----+    +------+
```

> `head` is written above `10` to represent that 10 is the head node.

While this might just look like an array IT IS NOT! An array gives us the ability to index into different spots within our array. We cannot do this with Linked List because all of the nodes reside in non-contiguous spots in memory. All of the `->` represent pointers that each node has pointing to the next.

A Linked List are really useful for storing things when the number of items you need to store might not be known. We can also delete nodes pretty easily which allows us to save memory while not wasting it on unused slots like in an array.

# Linked List in Code

```c
typedef struct node{
    struct node* next; // A pointer to the next node
    int data; //NOTE: Any kind of data could go here
}node;
```

> Here we don't store the whole list in a data structure when compared to the array; rather we store the individual nodes that compose the list itself.

Reviewer: I notice in this section there is no explicit mention of it, but it is used later as an assumption: The end of a linked list is indicated where the `next` pointer is `NULL`, so just a small note here may be good.

# Insert

In order to create Linked Lists, we must know how to insert into one. There are three main ways we will learn to insert: insert in front; insert in back; and insert in order.

## Insert in Front

First, we will trace through an example of how we will insert, then we will go over the code.

Let's consider inserting `7` into this list.

```          
+------+
| head |
+------+
+------+    +------+    +-----+    +-----+    +------+
|  10  | -> |  15  | -> |  3  | -> |  1  | -> | NULL |
+------+    +------+    +-----+    +-----+    +------+
```                  

Assuming we have access to the head of this list, all we must do is have `head` point to `7` and `7` point to what `head` originally had.

```
+------+
| head |
+------+
+------+    
|  10  | -> ...
+------+    
    ^
    |         Set 7's next pointer to 10 
    -----         
+-----+ | 
|  7  |-
+-----+
```

```          
+------+
| head |
+------+
+-----+    +------+ 
|  7  | -> |  10  | -> ...   Set 7's next pointer to 10
+-----+    +------+
```                  

> Since we have access constant access to the head,  we don't have to do any traversing. This make inserting in the front an `O(1)` operation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since we have constant-time access to the head, we don't have to do any traversing. This makes inserting in the front an `O(1)` operation.
```

> Now let's look at the code

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now let's look at the code:
```

```c
node* addToFront(node* head, int val){
    //Create the new head of the list with the value we want
    node* newHead = makeNode(val);
    newHead->data = val;
    //Set the new head of the list (This is what makes it O(1))
    newHead->next = head;
    //Return the new head of the list
    return newHead;
}
```

## Insert in Back

Now we will cover adding to the back of a Linked List. There will be two different ways that we can insert to the back; one way requires us to utilize a temporary pointer to traverse to the end of the list to add our node, and the other requires we keep track of another node within our list to add in `O(1)` time.

Here we insert `7` to the end of the list with our first method.

> We will create a temporary `node*` that will allow us to find the end of the list. Consider what happens if we do not create a temporary pointer. If we use the head to traverse the rest of the list then we will loose the nodes we pass over. This lose of unfreed memory is called a `memory leak`.

Reviewer: Small wording tweak, up to your consideration:

```suggestion
We will create a temporary `node*` that will allow us to find the end of the list. Consider what happens if we do not create a temporary pointer. If we use the `head` variable itself to traverse the rest of the list then we will lose the nodes we pass over. This loss of unfreed memory is called a `memory leak`.
```

Instead, we will create a temporary pointer called `tempHead` which we will use to traverse until the end of the list is reached.

```          

+------+
| head |
+------+
+------+    +------+    +-----+    +-----+    +------+
|  10  | -> |  15  | -> |  3  | -> |  1  | -> | NULL |
+------+    +------+    +-----+    +-----+    +------+
    ^
    |
+----------+
| tempHead |
+----------+
```                  

> We then iterate tempHeap until the node we are at has `NULL` next node. Then, we can add the new node to our list. 

Reviewer: I may tweak this wording here on the first sentence, maybe something along these lines to clarify what the role of `NULL` is:

```suggestion
We then iterate `tempHead` until the node we are at has `NULL` as the value of the `next` node. Then, we can add the new node to our list. 
```

```
+-----+       +------+
|  1  | -     | NULL |     1's next node is NULL
+-----+  |    +------+
         |       ^------
         |    +-----+  |
         |--> |  7  | --
              +-----+
```

> Once we've identified the last node in the list we simply add our new node to the back of the list. Since we have to traverse the WHOLE list to find the end, this makes this approach take `O(n)` time.

Reviewer: Over here, I would specify exactly what changes would be made, so pointing the last node to your new node, and pointing the new node to `NULL`.

Another way we can insert to back is by having another pointer to the end of the list. Typically we call this node `tail`. Keeping track of `tail` allows us to insert in `O(1)` time.

> Let's look at the `O(n)` insert code

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's look at the `O(n)` insert code:
```

```c
node* addToBack(node* head, int val){
    node* tail = makeNode(val);
    tail->data = val;

    node* temp = head;
    //If the head is NULL, then our new node is the head
    if(temp == NULL)
        return tail;
    //Iterate to the end of the list
    while(temp->next !=NULL)
        temp = temp->next;

    temp->next = tail;
    tail->next = NULL;

    //return the head of the new list
    return head;
}
```

Can you come up with the insert using `tail`?

## Insert in Order 

Besides adding either to the front of the back of a list we might want to add items in order. This will require us to add items in the middle of the list. 

This approach will require us to iterate until we find the correct spot to place our new node at.

Let's insert `13` into our list.

```
+------+
| head |
+------+
+------+    +------+    +------+    +------+    +------+
|  10  | -> |  11  | -> |  15  | -> |  18  | -> | NULL |
+------+    +------+    +------+    +------+    +------+
```

> What we will need to do is traverse the list until we find the first node that is greater than the value we want to add into our list. Just like add to back, we will need a temporary node in order to traverse over the list.

Reviewer: Just more semantics, but in this case for tracking, only a pointer is made instead of a node, so I would make that clear.

```suggestion
What we will need to do is traverse the list until we find the first node that is greater than the value we want to add into our list. Just like add to back, we will need a temporary pointer in order to traverse over the list.
```

```
+------+
| head |
+------+
+------+    +------+    +------+    +------+    +------+
|  10  | -> |  11  | -> |  15  | -> |  18  | -> | NULL |
+------+    +------+    +------+    +------+    +------+
    ^
    |
+----------+
| tempHead |
+----------+
```

We can utilize the ability to use `tempHead->next` to check the value in front of us. Once we find the first value that is greater than `13` we know that we make `13` the next pointer of `tempHead`.

```
+------+    +------+    +------+    +------+
|  11  | -> |  15  | -> |  18  | -> | NULL |
+------+    +------+    +------+    +------+
    ^
    |
+----------+
| tempHead |
+----------+
```

Since we know that `tempHead->next` = `15`, we will add `13` into the list 

```
+------+    +------+    +------+    +------+
|  11  | -| |  15  | -> |  18  | -> | NULL |
+------+  | +------+    +------+    +------+
    ^     |      ^
    |     |      |-----     
    |     ------      |
+----------+   |   +------+
| tempHead |   |-> |  13  |
+----------+       +------+
```

> We set `13` next value as `15` and then we set `tempHead`'s next value to 13. Now we've inserted `13` in the correct place within the list

Reviewer: This is one suggestion, but something similar to this as you think is good!

```suggestion
We set `13`'s next value as `15` and then we set `tempHead`'s next value to `13`. Now we've inserted `13` in the correct place within the list.
```

Technically this also has the same comment from the other PR about distinguishing between a node and the value within it, so it may be worth describing this at least once somewhere in the page, but since it was already mentioned I won't harp on it too much here.

It's clear to see that at WORST we might have to traverse the whole list, which makes this an `O(n)` operation.

```c
node* addInOrder(node* head, int val){
    node* toAdd = makeNode(val);
    //We just created a new list
    if(head==NULL)
        return toAdd;
    
    //If the value we want to add is less than the head our new node is the head
    if(val<head->data){
        toAdd->next = head;
        return toAdd;
    }
    //We know now that head must be < val, so we need to continually check temp->next elements
    node* temp = head;
    
    //Find the spot to place our new node
    while(temp->next!=NULL && temp->next->data<val)
        temp = temp->next;
        
    //After this, temp must be greater than our val
    //Inserting toAdd between temp and temp->next
    toAdd->next = temp->next;
    temp->next = toAdd;
    //Return the new head of the list
    return head;
}
```

# Delete

Deleting an element from a Linked List will be a lot like adding in order. We will need to keep track of the node that comes right before the node we want to delete. 

Once we "patch over" the deleted node, then we can free it.

> Let's delete `15` from the list

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's delete `15` from the list:
```

```
+------+
| head |
+------+
+------+    +------+    +------+    +------+    +------+
|  10  | -> |  11  | -> |  15  | -> |  18  | -> | NULL |
+------+    +------+    +------+    +------+    +------+
```

Just like before, we will need a temporary node to traverse the rest of the list. Once we find the node RIGHT BEFORE `15`, then we can perform the "patch over" and deletion of `15`.

```
+------+    +------+    +------+    +------+
|  11  | -> |  15  | -> |  18  | -> | NULL |
+------+    +------+    +------+    +------+
   ^
   |
+----------+
| tempHead |
+----------+
```

> Once we are here we will save `15` in another temporary node, then "patch over", then free `15.

Reviewer: Same as earlier, should this be a temporary node or a temporary pointer? Since we are working with these new concepts in linked lists, that distinction can be very important! (From experience as a TA you can never be too careful with thinking that a student will assume to know what you mean.)

Author: Perhaps for `NULL` we can just use an `X` like I used for the binary trees?

> Once we are here we will save `15` in another temporary node, then "patch over", then free `15.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once we are here we will save `15` in another temporary node, then "patch over", then free `15`.
```

```       
          ------------ 
+------+  | +------+ |  +------+    +------+
|  11  | -| |  15  | -> |  18  | -> | NULL |
+------+    +------+    +------+    +------+
   ^            ^
   |            -------
   |                  |
+----------+      +-----------+
| tempHead |      | tempHead2 |
+----------+      +-----------+
```

Now we can call `free(tempHead2)` to safely delete `15`.

Since at WORST we might have to traverse the whole list, this makes delete an `O(n)` operation.

> Now let's look at the delete code

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now let's look at the delete code:
```

    node* ahead = head->next;
    //If the head contains val, delete it and move the head up by
    //Needs to be fixed to continue removing head if it contains val
    while(head!= NULL && head->data == val){
        temp = head->next;
        ahead = ahead->next;
        free(head);
        head = temp;
    }
    
    while(ahead->next != NULL){
        //If the current node has the value we wanna delete
        if(ahead->data == val){
            //Link the node behind the current to the link in front 
            temp->next = ahead->next;
            free(ahead);
            ahead = temp->next;
        }
        //We didn't find the value we want so move everything up
        else{
            temp = temp->next;
            ahead = ahead->next;
        }
    }
    
    //Check to see if the end of the list contains the value
    if(ahead->data == val){
        temp->next = NULL;
        free(ahead);
    }
    
    return head;
}
```

> This code does deletions for multiple instances of the value that you want to delete from the list.

# Search

Searching in a Linked List is probably the easiest operation to perform since it is just a Linked List traversal.

> All we need is, you guessed it, a temporary node so we can search the whole list for the value what we are looking for. Once we find the value we are looking for we can return `1` to indicate a successful search or `0` for an unsuccessful.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All we need is, you guessed it, a temporary pointer so we can search the whole list for the value what we are looking for. Once we find the value we are looking for we can return `1` to indicate a successful search or `0` for an unsuccessful.
```
